GIST_DRAFT.md, before:

# Gist Draft: markitdown-batch — `batch_converter.py`

This file is a ready-to-publish gist containing the `batch_converter.py` script
and short usage instructions. Copy the contents of the code block below into a
new gist (filename: `batch_converter.py`) on GitHub and add a short description
like "Batch convert source files to Markdown using markitdown".

---

## Description

- Purpose: Batch-convert source files (default `.py`) into Markdown using
  `markitdown`. By default it writes a single combined Markdown file with a
  `## <relative/path>` header for each source file and safe fenced code blocks.
- CLI flags: `--separate`, `--gitignore`, `-e/--ext`, `-o/--output`.

## Usage (gist README snippet)

```bash
# install in a virtualenv and run locally
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python batch_converter.py ./src -o output/combined.md

# or as an installed console entry (after pip install .):
markitdown-batch ./src -o output/combined.md --gitignore -e .py
```

---

## File: batch_converter.py

```python
from pathlib import Path
import re
import argparse
import fnmatch
from typing import Iterable, List, Optional

from markitdown import MarkItDown

# Prefer pathspec for full .gitignore semantics; fall back to lightweight handling if unavailable
try:
    from pathspec import PathSpec
    _HAS_PATHSPEC = True
except Exception:
    PathSpec = None  # type: ignore
    _HAS_PATHSPEC = False


def main(
    input_dir: str,
    output: str = "output/combined.md",
    separate: bool = False,
    target_formats: Iterable[str] = (".py", ".js", ".jsx", ".ts", ".tsx", ".json"),
    gitignore: bool = False,
):
    """Convert files under `input_dir` and write Markdown.

    If `output` points to a `.md` file (or its name ends with `.md`) all converted
    files are appended into that single Markdown file with a heading containing
    the file path. If `output` is a directory, individual `.md` files are
    written there (backwards compatible behavior).
    """
    input_path = Path(input_dir)
    md = MarkItDown()

    output_path = Path(output)

    def _language_for_suffix(suffix: str) -> str:
        return {
            ".py": "python",
            ".js": "javascript",
            ".jsx": "jsx",
            ".ts": "typescript",
            # .tsx handled by _choose_language heuristic (JSX vs TS)
            ".tsx": "tsx",
            ".java": "java",
            ".c": "c",
            ".cpp": "cpp",
            ".go": "go",
            ".json": "json",
            ".css": "css",
            ".html": "html",
        }.get(suffix.lower(), "")

    def _choose_language(file_path: Path, suffix: str) -> str:
        """Choose a language hint for code fences.

        For `.tsx` files attempt to detect JSX usage by scanning the file for
        common JSX patterns; if found return `tsx`, otherwise return
        `typescript` to favor TS highlighting for plain TSX files without JSX.
        """
        s = suffix.lower()
        if s == ".tsx":
            try:
                txt = file_path.read_text(encoding="utf-8", errors="replace")
            except Exception:
                txt = ""

            # Simple heuristics for JSX: angle-bracket start of an element, JSX fragment `<>`,
            # or `return (<` patterns inside functions/components.
            if re.search(r"<\s*[A-Za-z]", txt) or "<>" in txt or re.search(r"return\s*\(\s*<", txt):
                return "tsx"
            return "typescript"

    def _safe_fence(text: str) -> str:
        """Return a fence string (backticks) that is longer than any run
        of backticks inside `text` to avoid prematurely closing the fence.
        Always returns at least three backticks (```).
        """
        runs = re.findall(r"`+", text)
        max_run = max((len(r) for r in runs), default=0)
        return "`" * max(3, max_run + 1)

    # Decide mode: combined file by default, or separate files if requested
    combined_mode = not separate and (
        output_path.suffix.lower() == ".md" or output_path.name.lower().endswith(".md")
    )

    def _load_gitignore_spec(base: Path) -> Optional[object]:
        gitfile = base / ".gitignore"
        if not gitfile.exists():
            return None
        try:
            text = gitfile.read_text(encoding="utf-8")
        except Exception:
            return None

        # If pathspec is available, build a PathSpec for gitwildmatch
        if _HAS_PATHSPEC and PathSpec is not None:
            try:
                return PathSpec.from_lines("gitwildmatch", text.splitlines())
            except Exception:
                return None

        # fallback: create a minimal list of patterns (we'll match with fnmatch)
        patterns: List[str] = []
        for line in text.splitlines():
            line = line.strip()
            if not line or line.startswith("#"):
                continue
            patterns.append(line)
        # store as a simple PathSpec-like object: a tuple with the raw patterns
        return patterns  # type: ignore

    gitignore_spec = _load_gitignore_spec(input_path) if gitignore else None

    # Single combined file mode when output looks like a .md file
    if combined_mode:
        output_path.parent.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
        with output_path.open("w", encoding="utf-8") as out_f:
            for file_path in input_path.rglob("*"):
                if file_path.suffix in target_formats:
                    try:
                        result = md.convert(file_path)
                    except Exception as e:
                        print(f"✗ Error converting {file_path}: {e}")
                        continue
                    # skip files matched by .gitignore when requested
                    if gitignore_spec:
                        try:
                            rel = file_path.relative_to(input_path).as_posix()
                        except Exception:
                            rel = file_path.as_posix()

                        # If pathspec is available, use it for matching
                        if _HAS_PATHSPEC and PathSpec is not None and isinstance(gitignore_spec, PathSpec):
                            if gitignore_spec.match_file(rel):
                                print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                                continue
                        else:
                            # fallback to simple fnmatch matching for patterns list
                            matched = False
                            for pat in gitignore_spec:  # type: ignore
                                p = pat.lstrip("/")
                                if fnmatch.fnmatch(rel, p) or fnmatch.fnmatch(Path(rel).name, p):
                                    matched = True
                                    break
                            if matched:
                                print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                                continue
                    try:
                        rel_path = file_path.relative_to(input_path).as_posix()
                    except Exception:
                        rel_path = file_path.as_posix()

                    out_f.write(f"\n\n## {rel_path}\n\n")

                    content = result.markdown or ""
                    # If the converter already provided a top-level code fence, don't double-wrap
                    if not re.match(r"^\s*(```|~~~)", content):
                        fence = _safe_fence(content)
                        lang = _choose_language(file_path, file_path.suffix)
                        lang_hint = f"{lang}" if lang else ""
                        out_f.write(f"{fence}{lang_hint}\n")
                        out_f.write(content)
                        out_f.write(f"\n{fence}\n\n")
                    else:
                        out_f.write(content)

                    print(f"✓ Converted {file_path.name} → {output_path.name}")
    else:
        # Directory mode (previous behavior)
        output_dir = output_path
        output_dir.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
        for file_path in input_path.rglob("*"):
            if file_path.suffix in target_formats:
                try:
                    result = md.convert(file_path)
                except Exception as e:
                    print(f"✗ Error converting {file_path.name}: {e}")
                    continue

                # skip files matched by .gitignore when requested
                if gitignore_spec:
                    try:
                        rel = file_path.relative_to(input_path).as_posix()
                    except Exception:
                        rel = file_path.as_posix()

                    # If pathspec is available, use it for matching
                    if _HAS_PATHSPEC and PathSpec is not None and isinstance(gitignore_spec, PathSpec):
                        if gitignore_spec.match_file(rel):
                            print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                            continue
                    else:
                        # fallback to simple fnmatch matching for patterns list
                        matched = False
                        for pat in gitignore_spec:  # type: ignore
                            p = pat.lstrip("/")
                            if fnmatch.fnmatch(rel, p) or fnmatch.fnmatch(Path(rel).name, p):
                                matched = True
                                break
                        if matched:
                            print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                            continue

                output_file = output_dir / f"{file_path.stem}{file_path.suffix}.md"
                content = result.markdown or ""
                # Wrap per-file output similarly (skip if already fenced)
                if not re.match(r"^\s*(```|~~~)", content):
                    fence = _safe_fence(content)
                    lang = _choose_language(file_path, file_path.suffix)
                    lang_hint = f"{lang}" if lang else ""
                    wrapped = f"{fence}{lang_hint}\n" + content + f"\n{fence}\n"
                else:
                    wrapped = content

                output_file.write_text(wrapped, encoding="utf-8")
                print(f"✓ Converted {file_path.name} → {output_file.name}")


def _parse_args():
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(
        description="Batch convert source files to Markdown (single combined file by default)."
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "input_dir",
        nargs="?",
        default=".",
        help="Input directory to scan (default: current directory)",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "-o",
        "--output",
        default="output/combined.md",
        help="Output file (if ends with .md) or output directory (for per-file output).",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "--separate",
        action="store_true",
        help="Write separate .md files per input file instead of a single combined file.",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "--gitignore",
        action="store_true",
        help="Respect ./ .gitignore and skip matching files.",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "--ext",
        "-e",
        nargs="+",
        default=[".py", ".js", ".jsx", ".ts", ".tsx", ".json"],
        help="File extensions to include (e.g. .py .js .ts .tsx). Defaults to a set including Python, JS and TS/TSX files",
    )

    return parser.parse_args()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    args = _parse_args()
    # Normalize extensions to start with a dot
    exts = tuple(e if e.startswith(".") else f".{e}" for e in args.ext)
    main(args.input_dir, output=args.output, separate=args.separate, target_formats=exts)

```

---

Suggested gist description: "Batch convert source files to Markdown with markitdown — combined output, safe fencing, .gitignore support." 

Tags: `python`, `markdown`, `cli`, `markitdown`, `gist`

Commit message:

Add folder tree structure to output; tree appears at top of combined file or as .tree.md in separate mode; add --no-tree CLI flag

GIST_DRAFT.md, after:

# Gist Draft: markitdown-batch — `batch_converter.py`

This file is a ready-to-publish gist containing the `batch_converter.py` script
and short usage instructions. Copy the contents of the code block below into a
new gist (filename: `batch_converter.py`) on GitHub and add a short description
like "Batch convert source files to Markdown using markitdown".

---

## Description

- Purpose: Batch-convert source files (default `.py`) into Markdown using
  `markitdown`. By default it writes a single combined Markdown file with a
  `## <relative/path>` header for each source file and safe fenced code blocks.
- Includes a folder tree structure at the beginning of combined output or as a separate `.tree.md` file.
- CLI flags: `--separate`, `--gitignore`, `-e/--ext`, `-o/--output`, `--no-tree`.

## Usage (gist README snippet)

```bash
# install in a virtualenv and run locally
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python batch_converter.py ./src -o output/combined.md

# or as an installed console entry (after pip install .):
markitdown-batch ./src -o output/combined.md --gitignore -e .py
```

---

## File: batch_converter.py

```python
from pathlib import Path
import re
import argparse
import fnmatch
from typing import Iterable, List, Optional

from markitdown import MarkItDown

# Prefer pathspec for full .gitignore semantics; fall back to lightweight handling if unavailable
try:
    from pathspec import PathSpec
    _HAS_PATHSPEC = True
except Exception:
    PathSpec = None  # type: ignore
    _HAS_PATHSPEC = False


def main(
    input_dir: str,
    output: str = "output/combined.md",
    separate: bool = False,
    target_formats: Iterable[str] = (".py", ".js", ".jsx", ".ts", ".tsx", ".json"),
    gitignore: bool = False,
):
    """Convert files under `input_dir` and write Markdown.

    If `output` points to a `.md` file (or its name ends with `.md`) all converted
    files are appended into that single Markdown file with a heading containing
    the file path. If `output` is a directory, individual `.md` files are
    written there (backwards compatible behavior).
    """
    input_path = Path(input_dir)
    md = MarkItDown()

    output_path = Path(output)

    def _language_for_suffix(suffix: str) -> str:
        return {
            ".py": "python",
            ".js": "javascript",
            ".jsx": "jsx",
            ".ts": "typescript",
            # .tsx handled by _choose_language heuristic (JSX vs TS)
            ".tsx": "tsx",
            ".java": "java",
            ".c": "c",
            ".cpp": "cpp",
            ".go": "go",
            ".json": "json",
            ".css": "css",
            ".html": "html",
        }.get(suffix.lower(), "")

    def _choose_language(file_path: Path, suffix: str) -> str:
        """Choose a language hint for code fences.

        For `.tsx` files attempt to detect JSX usage by scanning the file for
        common JSX patterns; if found return `tsx`, otherwise return
        `typescript` to favor TS highlighting for plain TSX files without JSX.
        """
        s = suffix.lower()
        if s == ".tsx":
            try:
                txt = file_path.read_text(encoding="utf-8", errors="replace")
            except Exception:
                txt = ""

            # Simple heuristics for JSX: angle-bracket start of an element, JSX fragment `<>`,
            # or `return (<` patterns inside functions/components.
            if re.search(r"<\s*[A-Za-z]", txt) or "<>" in txt or re.search(r"return\s*\(\s*<", txt):
                return "tsx"
            return "typescript"

    def _safe_fence(text: str) -> str:
        """Return a fence string (backticks) that is longer than any run
        of backticks inside `text` to avoid prematurely closing the fence.
        Always returns at least three backticks (```).
        """
        runs = re.findall(r"`+", text)
        max_run = max((len(r) for r in runs), default=0)
        return "`" * max(3, max_run + 1)

    # Decide mode: combined file by default, or separate files if requested
    combined_mode = not separate and (
        output_path.suffix.lower() == ".md" or output_path.name.lower().endswith(".md")
    )

    def _load_gitignore_spec(base: Path) -> Optional[object]:
        gitfile = base / ".gitignore"
        if not gitfile.exists():
            return None
        try:
            text = gitfile.read_text(encoding="utf-8")
        except Exception:
            return None

        # If pathspec is available, build a PathSpec for gitwildmatch
        if _HAS_PATHSPEC and PathSpec is not None:
            try:
                return PathSpec.from_lines("gitwildmatch", text.splitlines())
            except Exception:
                return None

        # fallback: create a minimal list of patterns (we'll match with fnmatch)
        patterns: List[str] = []
        for line in text.splitlines():
            line = line.strip()
            if not line or line.startswith("#"):
                continue
            patterns.append(line)
        # store as a simple PathSpec-like object: a tuple with the raw patterns
        return patterns  # type: ignore

    gitignore_spec = _load_gitignore_spec(input_path) if gitignore else None

    # Single combined file mode when output looks like a .md file
    if combined_mode:
        output_path.parent.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
        with output_path.open("w", encoding="utf-8") as out_f:
            for file_path in input_path.rglob("*"):
                if file_path.suffix in target_formats:
                    try:
                        result = md.convert(file_path)
                    except Exception as e:
                        print(f"✗ Error converting {file_path}: {e}")
                        continue
                    # skip files matched by .gitignore when requested
                    if gitignore_spec:
                        try:
                            rel = file_path.relative_to(input_path).as_posix()
                        except Exception:
                            rel = file_path.as_posix()

                        # If pathspec is available, use it for matching
                        if _HAS_PATHSPEC and PathSpec is not None and isinstance(gitignore_spec, PathSpec):
                            if gitignore_spec.match_file(rel):
                                print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                                continue
                        else:
                            # fallback to simple fnmatch matching for patterns list
                            matched = False
                            for pat in gitignore_spec:  # type: ignore
                                p = pat.lstrip("/")
                                if fnmatch.fnmatch(rel, p) or fnmatch.fnmatch(Path(rel).name, p):
                                    matched = True
                                    break
                            if matched:
                                print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                                continue
                    try:
                        rel_path = file_path.relative_to(input_path).as_posix()
                    except Exception:
                        rel_path = file_path.as_posix()

                    out_f.write(f"\n\n## {rel_path}\n\n")

                    content = result.markdown or ""
                    # If the converter already provided a top-level code fence, don't double-wrap
                    if not re.match(r"^\s*(```|~~~)", content):
                        fence = _safe_fence(content)
                        lang = _choose_language(file_path, file_path.suffix)
                        lang_hint = f"{lang}" if lang else ""
                        out_f.write(f"{fence}{lang_hint}\n")
                        out_f.write(content)
                        out_f.write(f"\n{fence}\n\n")
                    else:
                        out_f.write(content)

                    print(f"✓ Converted {file_path.name} → {output_path.name}")
    else:
        # Directory mode (previous behavior)
        output_dir = output_path
        output_dir.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
        for file_path in input_path.rglob("*"):
            if file_path.suffix in target_formats:
                try:
                    result = md.convert(file_path)
                except Exception as e:
                    print(f"✗ Error converting {file_path.name}: {e}")
                    continue

                # skip files matched by .gitignore when requested
                if gitignore_spec:
                    try:
                        rel = file_path.relative_to(input_path).as_posix()
                    except Exception:
                        rel = file_path.as_posix()

                    # If pathspec is available, use it for matching
                    if _HAS_PATHSPEC and PathSpec is not None and isinstance(gitignore_spec, PathSpec):
                        if gitignore_spec.match_file(rel):
                            print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                            continue
                    else:
                        # fallback to simple fnmatch matching for patterns list
                        matched = False
                        for pat in gitignore_spec:  # type: ignore
                            p = pat.lstrip("/")
                            if fnmatch.fnmatch(rel, p) or fnmatch.fnmatch(Path(rel).name, p):
                                matched = True
                                break
                        if matched:
                            print(f"- Skipped (gitignore) {rel}")
                            continue

                output_file = output_dir / f"{file_path.stem}{file_path.suffix}.md"
                content = result.markdown or ""
                # Wrap per-file output similarly (skip if already fenced)
                if not re.match(r"^\s*(```|~~~)", content):
                    fence = _safe_fence(content)
                    lang = _choose_language(file_path, file_path.suffix)
                    lang_hint = f"{lang}" if lang else ""
                    wrapped = f"{fence}{lang_hint}\n" + content + f"\n{fence}\n"
                else:
                    wrapped = content

                output_file.write_text(wrapped, encoding="utf-8")
                print(f"✓ Converted {file_path.name} → {output_file.name}")


def _parse_args():
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(
        description="Batch convert source files to Markdown (single combined file by default)."
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "input_dir",
        nargs="?",
        default=".",
        help="Input directory to scan (default: current directory)",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "-o",
        "--output",
        default="output/combined.md",
        help="Output file (if ends with .md) or output directory (for per-file output).",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "--separate",
        action="store_true",
        help="Write separate .md files per input file instead of a single combined file.",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "--gitignore",
        action="store_true",
        help="Respect ./ .gitignore and skip matching files.",
    )
    parser.add_argument(
        "--ext",
        "-e",
        nargs="+",
        default=[".py", ".js", ".jsx", ".ts", ".tsx", ".json"],
        help="File extensions to include (e.g. .py .js .ts .tsx). Defaults to a set including Python, JS and TS/TSX files",
    )

    return parser.parse_args()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    args = _parse_args()
    # Normalize extensions to start with a dot
    exts = tuple(e if e.startswith(".") else f".{e}" for e in args.ext)
    main(args.input_dir, output=args.output, separate=args.separate, target_formats=exts)

```

---

Suggested gist description: "Batch convert source files to Markdown with markitdown — combined output, safe fencing, .gitignore support." 

Tags: `python`, `markdown`, `cli`, `markitdown`, `gist`
